Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in today's
video we're going to look at a famous
formula Brettschneider and launched out for the
quadrille of a quadrilateral this is a redo of
a video where I talked about this subject but
I wasn't really quite as knowledgeable about
the history of the subject as I could have been
and thanks to some very useful suggestions and
information that I got for viewers I'm able to
redo this video with a little bit more accuracy
okay so we're talking about a quadrilateral
in the plane and a very famous formula that
illustrates the power of thinking rationally in
other words the power of thinking in a rational
way without any reference to real numbers or
infinite processes that are implicit most of
the time when we're doing real number arithmetic
ok so in particular this quadrilateral it's called
a1 a2 a3 a4 has quadrants --is Q I J so Q I J
is the quadrants between AI and AJ remind you
that's same as the square of the usual distance
or rather the distance is the square root of
the quadrants okay so there are six such quadrants
--is formed by these four points labeled like this
I would like to know a formula for the area of
a general quadrilateral not necessarily a cyclic
one like we've been talking about for the Brahma
Gupta and Robbins type formulas okay so there is
such a lovely formula and here it is right here
okay it's the formula for the quadrille of the
quadrilateral the quad RIA is 16 times the square
of the area now a particular combination for some
remarkable reason is the one that occurs many
many places in this subject so we give it a name
we call it the Quadra of the quad collateral and
here's the formula for it that was discovered by
Karl Brettschneider and Karl von Stout both in the
year 1840 - independently it is that the Quadra is
four times q1 three times q2 for the product of
that diagonal quadrants is times four minus q1
2 plus Q 3 4 minus q1 4 minus Q 2 3 all squared
so it's a formula just involving quadrants --is
not involving distances and it's a formula for
the quad reiative a general quadrilateral and in
my opinion this is a top 50 formula it's probably
one of the top 50 formulas in mathematics so it's
one that should be a well-known and we should all
understand the correct attribution of it now let
me remark that when you have a quadrilateral in
the plane the six quadrants is that are formed
here are not independent if you know five of them
then you can generally figure out the sixth one or
at least you can figure out the sixth one up to a
finite number of possibilities for example if we
know Q 1 to Q 2 3 Q 3 4 and Q 1 4 then we know the
quadrilateral and not at all in terms of its shape
because it's flexible but if we then know one of
the diagonals say Q 2 4 then that fixes the shape
of that triangle and that triangle and so then
the shape is pretty well rigid except for the
possibility that we could reflect this triangle in
that diagonal that we know so there's really two
possibilities once we know the five quadrants
and knowing that six quadrants then pins are
down this is also reflected in that formula of
Tartaglia that I talked about in some previous
video it was a formula for the volume or actually
the square of the volume of a tetrahedron and
when the tetrahedron collapses into the plane
we get a quadrilateral and then the volume is
necessarily zero so there is a well-known relation
between these six quadrants --is which means that
we should expect that a formula like this is
not unique there very well may be other kinds
of formulas involving these six quadratures that
essentially Express the area or the square of the
area nevertheless this is almost surely the best
and most beautiful such formula here's the formula
again and I'd like to point out a very important
special case when two of the points coalesce so if
a three equals a four then the quadrilateral
reduces to a triangle and in that case this
formula reduces to something that's very familiar
to us so in this special case when a three equals
a four then what happens well a q13 is still there
but the Q to 4 is the same as Q 2 3 the Q 1 2 is
before the Q 3 4 is now 0 and the Q 1 4 is the
same as Q 1 3 and the Q 2 3 is right there and so
what we get is just the formula that we've been
calling Archimedes theorem which is absolutely
fundamental formula going back thousands of years
and it's a direct generalization of the triple
quad formula for three points on a line that we've
discussed earlier that we sort of motivated a lot
of this discussion so in a very natural way this
is the most simplest and most elegant possible
generalization of Archimedes theorem to the
quadrilateral situation another interesting
special case that's worth pointing out is when
the quadrilateral d generates two four points in
a line in that case the area of the quadrilateral
is obviously zero and so the formula takes the
form that for Q 1 3 Q 2 4 equals Q 1 2 plus Q 3
4 q1 4 minus q2 3 all squared so that's telling
us something about the quadrants is formed by four
points on a line that's something that we didn't
know before we have talked about four points on
line that we've talked about the four quadrants
--is that we get when we cycle through those four
points from 1 to 2 2 to 3 3 to 4 and then back
from 4 to 1 those four quadrants --is satisfy
the quadruple quad formula here we see that if
we look at the other two quadrants as well namely
Q 1 3 between a 1 and a 3 and Q 2 4 between a 2
and a 4 then those six squadrons will satisfy this
simpler relationship so that's another interesting
special case and this is another extension of
the triple quad formula that we started out by
motivating the entire subject which was for Q 1
3 Q 2 3 equals Q 1 2 minus Q 1 3 minus Q 2 3 all
squared 4 3 collinear points a 1 a 2 a 3 and the
quadrants is Q 1 to Q 2 3 and Q 1 3 so I'd like
to present to you a proof of the Brettschneider
launched out formula before I do that I think
it's sensible to start with a proof of Archimedes
theorem since that's a smaller source more special
case and also of course of great independent
interest we've seen a proof of this in the case
when we have three points on the unit circle
let's have a look at the general case we have
three points a 1 a 2 a 3 we're going to proceed
just by writing down both sides of the equations
and then seeing that they're equal the Quadra of
the triangle is 4 times this expression squared
the triple quad function applied to q1 q2 and
q3 which are the quadrants is formed by these
three points he is defined by this expression
that's the asymmetric form for hue 1 q2 minus
q1 plus q2 minus q3 squared and maybe I should
remark that sometimes I write q1 plus q2 minus
q3 squared and sometimes I might write the same
thing as q3 minus q1 minus q2 all squared because
there's a square there it doesn't matter if I
change what's inside by multiplying by minus
1 of course there's also a symmetric version of
that namely q1 plus q2 plus q3 all squared minus
2 times q1 squared + q2 squared plus q3 squared
this asymmetric form is sometimes easier to work
with because it's a bit shorter alright so we
just write down the various things there's four
there's q1 which is the quadrants between a2 and
a3 so it's x3 minus x2 squared plus y3 minus y2
squared that's the definition of the quadrants
between these two points purely algebraic only
involving addition subtraction multiplication
no infinite processes required there is the q1
there's correspondingly q2 and then we subtract
the expression with Q 1 here plus Q 2 here and
minus q3 here ok so what does the proof consist
of the proof consists of taking this expression
here expanding it and then saying that in fact it
can be rewritten to give you the Quadra a this is
something that a computer can do in an instant
so if you input this into your computer and ask
it to factorize that or simplify maybe with sage
or maple or Mathematica or MATLAB or scientific
workplace or mute pad or geogebra probably also
right so you will do this in a flash Spectras
this for you and that's basically the proof
in this case it's not impossible to work this
all out by hand especially if you sort of know
beforehand that you're going to get of square and
you're looking for this expression squared it's
a purely algebraic almost automatic proof it's
really in some sense trivial for a computer but
one should be appreciative that it's a some sense
of deep algebraic identity we're talking about one
polynomial expression equaling another polynomial
expression on the surface those things are quite
different yet remarkably they're actually the same
so there are many such polynomial identities
that playing a role in mathematics and I think
in the future century and so we're going to
see many many more such polynomial identities
assert themselves as really core objects in our
understanding of geometry certainly but probably
other areas of mathematics as well so that's
a proof of Archimedes theorem all right so now
let's graduate to a proof of the Brettschneider
punched out formula we proceed in exactly the
same fashion we write down four points in general
position so we have these various variables x1 x2
y1 y2 etc then we write down the quadrille of
the quadrilateral which is very similar to the
quadrille of the triangle except that there's
some one more additional term here so if one
term coming from a1 a2 one term coming from a2 a3
that one there one from a3 a4 that one there and
this one here from a 4 and a 1 so all of that
squared times 4 and on the other side we have
this expression for Q 1 3 Q 2 4 minus Q 1 2 plus
Q 3 4 minus Q 1 4 minus Q 2 3 all squared right so
we just substitute in what is Q 1 3 the quadrants
between these two so that's X 3 minus X 1 squared
plus y 3 minus y squared so there is q13 and there
is q24 and then we have to subtract a big bracket
all squared which contains inside q1 2 plus Q 3
4 minus q1 4 minus q2 3 the assertion is that if
you input this into your computer and then you
press the factor button or the simplify button
or whatever it is then BOOM it will output exactly
this expression for you which is the Quadra a so
it's another lovely triviality in some sense or
at least your computer certainly makes it look
like it's a triviality but in years gone by if you
just had to take this expression and simplify it
yourself unless you knew what the answer was
beforehand it might be quite a challenge but
it's another remarkable kind of identity again
playing the central role in explaining why this
thing works from this point of view now that's
not to say that there aren't other proofs there
are of course other proofs but in some sense
this is a very simple-minded one right almost
no thinking is required it's almost automatic
you just proceed down the road and you do the
obvious things and you let the computer find
the miracle that is actually responsible for
things so this is actually a very powerful way
of proceeding and I think it's going to change
people's attitudes towards geometry right this
idea that we can look for relations by looking
for four identities that we can get our computers
to help us not just verifying the identities but
also ultimately finding them as well this is a
more subtle point but it's not impossible these
days for your computer if you just input the
various quadrants as namely these expressions
and you input the Quadra has another expression
if you have a good program or maybe with a bit of
skill you are in a position for getting your
computer to actually find this relation it's
a very interesting aspect closely connected to
their modern development called Grosvenor Basie's
in in algebraic geometry you might talk about some
future point so anyway very interesting new kind
of algebraic orientation - what does it mean to
actually prove something in geometry these days
purely algebraically and avoiding all mention of
any infinite quantities so let me say a few words
about the history of this interesting result so
this formula of Brettschneider and bunched out
discovered independently by these to find german
geometers it has resurfaced quite a few times
and i have number of people to thank for various
investigations and enlightenment that have been
passed on to me and in particular i would like to
pay special thanks to martin Josephson who is a
maths and physics teacher in the south of sweden
also works doing some research in quadrilaterals
who basically oriented me in a good direction
with respect to a lot of the history here ok
so amongst the people who have rediscovered this
formula and sometimes it's attributed to them one
of them is mathematician named da store who wrote
down the formula in 1848 just shortly after rich
Schneider and branched out by the way a da store
according to Martin Josephson is also actually
responsible for Robins formula for the non convex
Brahma Gupta type formula for the area of a cyclic
quadrilateral that's very other interesting kind
of aspect relating to one of our previous videos
so one might look more carefully at the work of
this fellow it seems that some what this result
of bretschneider launched out has sort of dropped
off the radar at points because as I mentioned in
the last iteration of this video it resurfaced as
a problem in the problems section of the american
mathematical monthly in 1960 this problem e 1 376
and at that time I thought that's perhaps actually
where the problem originated but now we know that
no it's in fact a 19th century result that goes
back to two very important German geometers this
theorem formula of bretschneider image that is
also discussed in patches book selected topics in
geometry with classical versus computer proving
which was published in 2007 in this book patch
deals with a number of classical formulas in
geometry with the idea of having a look at sort of
automatic computer type proving very much I guess
suppose in the direction of the kinds of things
we're talking about in the in the previous proofs
so I haven't actually seen this book but I look
forward to having a look at it and for those of
you who find this topic interesting I think
this is very future-looking sounding kind of
book and I'm looking forward to having a read of
it of course there are many other formulas for
a quadrilateral it's a very interesting subject
which I hope to discuss in greater length probably
either in the wild trig series at some point
or in my universal hyperbolic geometry series
at some point but I'd like to at least mention two
other classical formulas that are very much in the
direction of the Brahma Gupta kinds of results
that we started about talking about so here's
a formula for the area of a general quadrilateral
ABCD in terms of a brahma gupta type formula but
this time it's a general quadrilateral not a
cyclic one so Bravo Gupta's formula says that
the area of a cyclic quadrilateral is the
square root of these product here where s
is the semi-perimeter sum of the four lengths of
the sides divided by two but in this formula we
augment that by subtracting an additional term
which is ABCD referring to the foreign lengths
now of the sides times Coast squared of alpha
plus gamma over 2 where alpha is say this angle
at the point a and gamma is this angle opposite
it at the point to see all of that over 2 okay
so this formula involves things called angles and
officially we don't know what angles are because
we haven't defined them for a very good reason and
officially we don't know what this cosine object
is either because we haven't defined that either
also for a very good reason but nevertheless if
you're kind of willing to be happy with a bit of
hand waving then you can take the usual meanings
of these things and you get some formula like this
and it reduces to Brahma Gupta's formula because
in the case of the cyclic quadrilateral it's known
that this angle in this angle provided they make
sense add up to 180 degrees or PI and then PI over
2 has the property that it's cosine is 0 and so
that then makes this second term disappear and we
go back to Brahma cook this formula all right so
this is an attractive result for sure and it's a
proper attribution is to Gretsch Nider and Strelka
also in 1842 so that same paper of Brettschneider
and another independent paper of Strelka in 1842
where this formula was established and I think
Martin Josephson again for that information and
then there's a similar kind of formula where
this term here with the transcendental circular
function and the angle reference is replaced
with this term here 1/4 AC plus BD plus P Q
where P and Q are the diagonal lengths times AC
plus BD minus PQ and we see another connection
with the cyclic situation because in the cyclic
situation Ptolemies theorem says that AC plus BD
equals PQ and so that term is going to be 0 this
formula is as far as I know due to the geometry
and historian of geometry JL Coolidge in 1939 and
of course there are many other formulas Oilers
spent a bit of time thinking about formulas for
quadrilaterals and there are many others so this
is actually a beautiful topic of investigation
that hasn't seen nearly as much development as the
triangle geometry situation which of course now
is is very much developed and very rich subject
so I think there will be some catching up to do in
the quadrilateral world still many many beautiful
things to be discovered about quadrilaterals
soon I think important connections with both
mathematics and physics now it's important to
point out that there really is a huge difference
between the original formula that we talked
about the Brettschneider punched-out formula
for the quadrille of a general quadrilateral and
these other formulas that I just showed you now
due to Brettschneider and Strelka and Coolidge
this first formula is a proper result of pure
mathematics in the sense that all the ingredients
are pinned down precisely we're talking about
quadrants in the plane we know exactly what that
means we can compute that exactly there's nothing
ambiguous about it whatsoever we can work just
in the rational setting no infinite processes no
ambiguities whatsoever and we can demonstrate
the solidity of this by verifying the theorem
in special cases and I'm going to shortly ask
you do that in distinction the other formulas
on the previous slide involved notions like
distances square roots angles transcendental
functions these are all objects that ought to be
in quotes their definitions are all problematic
in fact seriously problematic so much so that
they render the results actually only approximate
statements I would go so far as to say that they
belong to Applied Mathematics and not in fact to
pure mathematics they are both very valuable and
interesting formulas from a applied mathematics
point of view you can verify them from an applied
point of view by actually drawing a picture and
getting out a ruler and making some measurements
of distances and getting out a protractor and make
measuring some angles and so on and you can verify
upto a certain amount of discrepancy because of
the measurement process that things work but if
you actually want to get an exact verification
by choosing four random points and then computing
the left and the right hand sides you will see as
I think you're probably familiar by now that the
square roots involved in the angles involved in
the transcendental functions and the distances
involved render this very problematic because
the formulas are asking you to finish infinite
processes which you cannot actually do and the
best that you can do is some floating point
approximations to things which means that you
can't actually verify this thing in a generic
case so there is in fact a big difference
between these two kinds of formulas we shouldn't
lump them together okay one is definitely on a
different level than the others the Brettschneider
punched-out formula is on a separate level it's a
rational formula all right so three exercises for
you the first is to verify the bretschneider von
Stout formula in some special cases over the
some numbers so pick four points with integer
coefficients say to make life easy in the plane
and then compute the quadrille using the formula
for the Quadra compute the quadrants --is and then
apply the formula and see if indeed the Quadra is
really given by the formula there's something
satisfying about doing that I think to see that
everything actually does work out just as the
formula claims that it does the second exercise
I want you to do the same thing but to work over a
different underlying field say the field of seven
elements that we talked about in one of our last
videos where everything is reduced mod seven or
you basically set seven equal to zero so you
can go through the same exercise but now the
computations are easier because well whenever
you see a seven you can replace it with a zero
so it's easier to actually verify it in in the
situation where you have say some finite field
then you could try f7 or f11 or f13 you'll see
how you go and now a little bit in a different
direction and also sort of opening up some new
doors I hope for you if to show that in the red
or relativistic geometry where we change the
quadrants instead of having x2 minus x1 squared
plus y2 minus y1 squared we have a minus sign here
that's the new kind of quadrants between these two
points let then there is a replacement for the
Brettschneider launched out formula which is
almost the same but not quite so you can still
take four points you can still take that same
formula for the Quadra that doesn't change but now
the quadrants is are going to look quite different
from what they did before because you're going
to compute them using this formula and then you
can check that it's minus the quadrille which is
for Q 1 3 Q 2 4 minus Q 1 2 plus Q 3 4 minus Q 1
4 minus Q 2 3 all squared suggesting that when
we change the metrical structure that in fact
a nature of the formula isn't changing that much
is just some kind of little compensating factor
that comes in there that is a small adjustment so
that the formula in this essence is still valid
you might like to prove that in general or get
your computer to prove it all right so this is
very interesting in our next video I want to go
a little bit more in in this in this direction
I want to talk about the the various roles of
lengths and areas and in higher dimensions volume
that we've been implicitly talking about when
were you talking about one-dimensional affine
geometry two-dimensional affine geometry a little
bit about three dimensional affine geometry so
there's a very strong orientation that the modern
student of mathematics has that says that the
proper measurements of linear and planar and solid
objects are lengths areas and volumes I'm going to
have to try to change your point of view on that
just a little bit all right so we've already been
doing that a little bit you probably know by
now that lengths is not really the right thing
that quadrants is are better and you've already
getting used to the idea that area is not always
the best that these quadrants sometimes seem to
work best and so we'd have to look at this whole
situation in sort of a bigger picture thinking
about dimensions relating to each other so we're
really getting at the fundamental nature of what
we measure when we're doing pure mathematics in
a geometrical setting I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening
you